Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent picture in a book, called True Stories from Nature, about the primeval forest. It was a picture of a boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal. Here is a copy of the drawing. In the book it said Boa constrictors swallow their prey whole, without chewing After that they are not able to move, and they sleep through the six months that they need for digestion.I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the jungle. 
And after some work with a colored pencil I succeeded in making my first drawing. My Drawing Number One. It looked like this I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered Frighten? 
Why should any one be frightened by a hat?My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I made another drawing I drew the inside of the boa constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly. They always need to have things explained. My Dr
awing Number Two looked like this The grown-ups' response, this time, was to advise me to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether from the inside or the I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and asked them whether the drawing frightened them. But they answered Frighten? When you tell them that you have made a new friend, they never ask you any questions about essential matters. T hey never say to you, What does his voice sound like? What games does he love best? Does he collect butterflies? Instead, they demand How old is he? How many brothers has he? How much does he weigh? How much money does his father make? Only from these figures do they think they have learned anything about him. If you were to say to the grown-ups I saw a beautiful house made of rosy brick, with geraniums in the windows and doves on the roof, they would not be able to get any idea of that house at all. You would have to say to them I saw a house that cost $ 20,000. Then they would exclaim Oh, what a pretty house that is!Just so, you might say to them The proof that the little prince existed is that he was charming, that he laughed, and that he was looking for a sheep. If anybody wants a sheep, that is a proof that he exists. And what good would it do to tell them th at? They would shrug their shoulders, and treat you like a child. But if you said to them The planet he came from is Asteroid B-612, then they would be convinced, and leave you in peace from their questions. They are like that. One must not hold it against them. Children should always show great forbearance toward grown-up people. But certainly, for us who understand life, figures are a matter of indifference. I should have liked to begin this story in the fashion of the fairy-tales. I should have like to say Once upon a time there was a little prince who lived on a planet that was scarcely any bigger than himself, and who had need of a sheep...To those who understand life, that would have given a much greater air of truth to my story. For I do not want any one to read my book carelessly. I have suffered too much grief in setting down these memories. Six years have already passed since my friend went away from me, with his sheep. If I try to describe him here, it is to make sure that I shall not forget him. To forget a friend is sad. Not every one has had a friend. And if I forget him, I may become like the grown-ups who are no longer interested in anything but figures... It is for that purpose, again, that I have bought a box of paints and some pencils. It is hard to take up drawing again at my age, when I have never made any pictures except those of the boa constrictor from the outside and the boa constrictor from the i nside, since I was six. I shall certainly try to make my portraits as true to life as